Understanding what is meant by human rights

Human rights are the basic rights and freedoms to which all human beings are entitled. They are applicable at all times and in all places and they protect everyone equally, without discrimination. The United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights states:

"Human rights are rights inherent to all human beings, whatever our nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic origin, color, religion, language, or any other status. We are all equally entitled to our human rights without discrimination."

Definitions and understanding of human rights and the issues that surround them in the twenty-first century are derived from The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). This was one of the most significant events in human rights history when it was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. Two examples of the statements found within the Declaration are:

Article 5: No one shall be subject to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 9: No one shall be subject to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.
Other examples, and there are 30 in all, may be found at www.un.org/en/documents/udhr.

Since that time it has become evident that many of the principles set out in 1948 have not been adhered to uniformly. From a geographical perspective these violations of human rights have occurred in many different parts of the world, on every continent, in advanced countries as well as in developing countries, and at different scales from individuals to large scale groups. Examples include use of child labor, people trafficking, genocide, and modern slavery.

Globalization has contradictory impacts on human rights. Transnational integration and increased mobility have had the effect of simultaneously strengthening and diminishing the protection of human rights.

On the one hand this has enhanced the ability of civil society to work across borders and to promote human rights.
On the other it has enabled some organizations to gain power and perpetrate violations.
Geographical patterns of socio-economic inequality are closely associated with inequalities in respect for human rights. Many development programs and the steps towards achieving the UN’s Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have been human rights led.

The website of the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Pages/ListOfIssues.aspx is a useful resource for further investigation of human rights issues.

Human rights norms

Human rights norms represent ways of living that have been inculcated into the culture of a country or area over long periods of time. They are the foundation of human rights. It was on the basis of established customs and norms drawn from all cultures, religions, and philosophies across the world that the UDHR was devised. These norms are based on the moral principles that underpin the universally accepted standards of human behavior.

The statements set out in the UDHR are generally accepted as international human rights norms. And although this is a non-binding resolution, human rights are in fact protected by international law.